
# An Initial Overview of the Pentateuch

## A. The Titles & Labels for the Pentateuch:

The “Pentateuch” is the first five books of the OT = Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers & Deuteronomy. The first part of the English word “Pentateuch,” “Penta-,” means five. It reflects the fact that there are five books in it.

The most common NT label for the Pentateuch or for the "law of Moses" is simply "the law."

The common OT label is "the torah of Moses.” The word “torah” comes from a Hebrew word that means "teaching.”

<pre>However, in many translations of the OT, the Hebrew word “torah” is often rendered “law,” so that it will be consistent with the way the NT renders it.</pre>

Both terms, torah and law, make sense.

The Pentateuch is also called "**the five books of Moses**" because Moses is viewed as their primary author.

<hr class='section' />

## B. A Basic Observation about the Pentateuch:

The Pentateuch is . . .

In the ancient hand-written manuscripts of the Old Testament (= the Hebrew Bible), at the end of the book of Deuteronomy, there are some notes from the ancient Jewish scribes. These notes tell us that they viewed the five books of the Pentateuch as one overall book, the Torah of Moses.

<hr class='section' />

## C. The Major Developments / Events in the Pentateuch:

- Genesis:

  - Genesis tells the story of creation, and the fall; the flood, & the preservation of the race through Noah; and the confusing of languages & the scattering of the nations at the tower of Babel.

  - Then, God called one family / nation (Abraham) through which to reach all nations.

  - The patriarchs were: Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob (Jacob's name was changed to Israel).

  - Jacob and his family (the Israelites) wound up down in Egypt.

- Exodus:

  - After they were treated badly, God brought them out of Egypt with great power.

  - Israel then had a dramatic encounter with God at Mt. Sinai.

  - The nation of Israel entered into a covenant with God at Mt. Sinai, = the Sinai covenant.

  - The 'Law' is the stipulations of this covenant.

- Leviticus:

  - Israel receives the laws governing their sacrifices, offerings, & festivals.

- Numbers:

  - Israel spied out the land, but the Israelites do not believe God to enter the land, and voted 'no'.

  - As a consequence, God decrees that they will wander for 40 years in the wilderness.

  - The older unbelieving generation gradually died off over the 40 years (see Ps 95).

- Deuteronomy:

  - Eventually, God leads the younger generation to the plains of Moab, just east of the Jordan river.

  - The book of Deuteronomy takes place there. Moses gives speeches which prepare them to cross the Jordan and enter the promised land. // That is where the Pentateuch concludes.

<hr class='logo' />
