
# Some Preliminary Observations Re: Genesis 1 & 2

## A. Q: What is the genre of Genesis 1?

Is it poetry, or is it more straight-forward?

Genesis 1 & 2 are written in a generally straight-forward style of writing (prose / narrative).
They are not(!) poetry; so we cannot dismiss them as merely symbolic or allegorical.

There are books in the OT which are clearly poetic, among them: Psalms & Proverbs, and many portions of the prophetic books (esp.: Hosea, Amos, Micah, & Isaiah). Genesis 1 is not like them. The difference between poetry and narrative can even be seen in the Hebrew manuscripts themselves, because poetry and narrative are laid out differently on the page.

- **Narrative sections** look much like the layout of modern journalism or novels:

  - They fill the page from margin to margin, leaving little-to-no space at the end of a line.
  - New sentences can begin in the middle of a column.
  - And paragraph breaks are indicated by a line that is left open, or sometimes by a large gap within a line.

- **Poetic sections**, on the other hand, are laid out in verse-format;
  - New lines begin at the right-hand margin (Hebrew is written from right to left).
  - There is often white space left open at the end of a line.


  ```
  Prose / Narrative                 | 'Right-justified' Poetic Lines
  xxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx¶   |            xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
  xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxx   |               xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
  xxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx   |              xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
  xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx         |                xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
  xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx¶    |           xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
  xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxx   |              xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
  xxxxxxxxxxx¶ xxxxxxxxxxxx         |                 xxxxxxxxxxxxxx
  xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx    |                   xxxxxxxxxxxx
  xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxx   |            xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
  xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx             |              xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
  xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx¶    |               xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
  xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxx   |          xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
  ```

  Genesis 1 & 2 are not laid out as poetry; they are laid out the way narrative passages are laid out.

**However(!)** → compared to regular OT narrative accounts, Genesis 1 is different. It is highly structured. In particular: in days 1-3, God creates the spaces; in days 4-6, He fills them. And it also has features that are not like routine straight-forward prose narrative. In particular, it has a lot of cadence and repetition of similar lines ("And God said . . . and there was evening, and there was morning . . . "). You do not find such features in the normal narrative / historical accounts in the Old Testament.

**The Point**: The genre of Genesis 1 is not poetry. So we cannot simply dismiss it as a symbolic or allegorical account. It is much closer to narrative than it is to poetry. But on the other hand it is not 'usual' narrative. So this allows the possibility that it might not be a strictly chronological account. We will consider this more in the next handout.

<hr class='section' />

## B. Some Very Basic Observations from Genesis 1:

- The text does not argue for . . .

- The existence of God . . .

- There is no hint of . . .

- Everything in the cosmos . . .

- There is nothing that has independent existence apart from God.

  Even Satan . . .

- In Genesis there is no description of any . . .

- The biblical understanding of the cosmos begins not with matter, but with God.

- Don’t miss this: Direct creation of the universe out of nothing by a direct act of God’s will ⇒

<hr class='section' />

## C. Q: Is there one account of creation in Genesis, or are there two?

What we do not have is → one seamless account from the initial creation until the account of the fall. Rather, there is a second account (Gen 2) that steps back and picks up at the creation of humans. In particular –

- **The first account** – records the creation of the man and(!) the woman on the sixth day.

- **The second account** – steps back a bit to a point before the creation of the woman.

  It then records the creation of the woman, and tells us that God brought her to the man.

- Q: Does the fact that there are two accounts of creation in Genesis pose a problem for people who believe the Bible is true?

- A: __

  No; Scripture does this sometimes –

  - The structure of 1 & 2 Kings clearly overlaps with itself at points.

  - 1 & 2 Chronicles record many of the same events as are recorded in 1 & 2 Kings.

    But often, each account has details that the other account (the “parallel” account) does not have.

  - Similarly, the Gospels often record the same events. But one gospel often provides details that the parallel accounts in the other gospels do not have.

<hr class='section' />

## Conclusion:

There are two creation accounts in Genesis. Both of them are true. Each account gives us information that the other account does not give us. We are to read them both. We are to read them in light of each other.

<hr class='logo' />
