
# Genesis 5 – 50; the Patriarchs & God's Promises

- Genesis 5:1

  > "These are the generations of Adam . . ." = _this is what followed on from Adam._

  This expression signals the start of the next major segment of Genesis.

- Genesis 5:1-2

  - Q: Are women also created in the image of God, or just 'man'?

  - Q: Whom did Cain marry? (from Genesis ch. 4)

  In Gen 5:3 we are told that Adam fathered Seth when he was 130 years old.

  We are not told . . .

  In like manner, back in Gen 4 we are told about Cain & Abel. But we are not specifically told . . .

  Genesis 5:4 adds that after that, Adam lived another 800 years, "and had other sons and daughters."

  Over the course of centuries, the race would be expanding rapidly. There might not yet have been much of a population when Cain slew Abel (Gen 4:8), but by then Cain could easily have had several other siblings.

  By the time Seth was born, there likely would have already been multiple generations already. Before long, there would be plenty of people for Cain to marry. Genesis does not seem to lose any sleep over whom Cain (or Seth!) married.

- Genesis 5:3–32

  The Genealogy from Adam to Noah — some noteworthy features of it:

  - The length of the lives mentioned.
  - A unique feature of this genealogy:
  - Note the pattern; then note the break in the pattern.

- Genesis 6-9

  The Flood

  - Don't miss the fact that the flood is . . . .
  - There are implications regarding the nature of God:
  - Again we see the cycle of:

- Gen 9:6

  The first authorization of . . .

  And note the reason:

  In the NT, see Romans 13:4 – "[those in authority] . . . do not bear the sword in vain."

- Genesis 10-11

  Table of Nations & Tower of Babel.

  - Q: Why did they build the Tower of Babel? Ans.:

  Again, there is the cycle: sin → judgment → and preservation; but ch. 11 does not end with any mention of renewed blessing. So this raises the question:

  - Q: Will God continue his intention, his 'program' of seeking to bless mankind? Will He renew blessing?

    A: ??? See Genesis 12.

- Genesis 12:1-9

  The Promises to Abraham & His Seed / The Abrahamic Covenant.

  - A: Yes, God does renew his intention to bless the earth.

    But what changes as of this time, is that now . . .

  - Q: What is promised to Abraham & his seed?

    A: The three main specific promises are:

  - Q: Of the three main promises, which one is the over-arching programmatic goal?

    A: __ .

  - Q: Does it explicitly say, "Only Abraham's _physical_ seed get the land & great nation"?

    A: __ .

  - Q: So what is unique, what is exclusive, to Abraham & his seed?

    A: __ .

- Genesis 15.

  The promises are confirmed by a covenant.

  - Q: "How can I know that I will inherit it?" (v. 8).

    A: God uses a covenant ritual with his pledge; the promises are now clearly guaranteed.

    NB: There will be a long delay before the greater fulfillment.

- Genesis 17.

  The Covenant / Sign of Circumcision

  - Verses 3-8: "As for me, my covenant is with you . . ."

  - Verses 9-14: "As for you . . . this is the covenant you must keep . . ."

  - Q: Does this passage offer any new category of blessings?

    A: __ ?

  - Q: Does the rest of the Bible ever refer to "God's covenants" (plural), with Abraham?

    A: __

    That is why circumcision is often not regarded as a separate covenant, but as being connected with the existing Abrahamic promises. It is seen as elaborating the conditional dynamic of the Abrahamic covenant.

    Gen 18:19 & Gen 22:16-18, & Gen 26:5 express the conditional dynamic of the Abrahamic promises.

    See also(!) Joshua 5:6, which alludes to Psalm 95.

  - Observation Q: If a male is circumcised, does that guarantee he will inherit the Abrahamic promises?

    Answer:

  - Verses 19–21 Then esp. note: 19-21 → "My covenant I will establish with __ ".

- Genesis 21:8-13

  > "Your seed will be reckoned through Isaac." (v.12). [And subsequently thru Jacob.]

  - Q: Is Ishmael outright excluded from the covenant? Yes, or no?

    Abraham's seed will be reckoned through Isaac, yes; but is Ishmael excluded?

    A:

- Genesis 22:1-19

  Abraham & Isaac. The promises are affirmed with an __ .

- Genesis 25

  Esau sells . . .

  [See(!) Deut 21:17, regarding the birthright.]

- Genesis 26:2-5, 24

  The promises are confirmed by God to → Isaac.

- Genesis 27

  Jacob receives (steals??) Isaac's.

  Clarifying: "Birthright" (Gen 25) ← vs. → "Blessing" (Gen 27; see also Gen 49).

  - Q: Did Isaac know what God had told to Rebekah? (Gen 25:19–26, esp. v. 23)

- Genesis 28:10-15

  - The promises are confirmed by God to → Jacob.

  - Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are called "the patriarchs."

  - So the Abrahamic covenant is also called:

- Genesis 32:1–12

  Jacob returns to the land, crossing the Jabbok river (v. 22).

  Recall earlier, what God had said to Jacob:

  - Gen 28:13-15

    > "I will give you the land . . . your offspring with be numerous . . . in your offspring all families of the earth will be blessed . . . I will not leave you until I have done what I have promised."

  - Gen 31:3

    > "Return to the land of your fathers, and to your kindred, and I will be with you."

  Then don't miss → Jacob's prayer, vv. 9–12. It is the first lengthy prayer recorded in Scripture.

- Genesis 49:8-10

  Judah receives the = is promoted to the position of primacy among his brothers.

- Genesis 37-50

  The Joseph Narrative; i.e., How Israel got down into Egypt.

  The theological conclusion of the Joseph narrative:

  - 50:20
  - 45:8

  Therefore, we may conclude that . . .

  In particular:

<hr class='logo' />
