H/O #20 – Exodus Overview #1, Chs. 1–24 
Overview: The book of Exodus covers the time –
from late in Israel's time in Egypt, when the Egyptians begin to treat them harshly;
through the birth & life of Moses;
through God's calling Moses (at the burning bush); 
through the confrontation with Pharaoh / the 10 plagues; 
through Israel's departure from Egypt ( = "the exodus"); 
through their arrival at Mt. Sinai; God meets with them dramatically at Mt Sinai; 
they receive the law and enter into a covenant (the "Sinai covenant") with God; 
until the tabernacle & ark of the <Sinai> covenant are completed; 
and then God's presence comes upon the tabernacle. 
Exodus 2:23–25
Yahweh heard their groaning, was concerned about them, and remembered . . .
Exodus 3 & 4 Moses at the Burning Bush 
A point of interest, concerning God: In Exod 4:10–16, what does Moses request? 
What is God's reply? 
Exodus 6:2-8 Yahweh will bring them to . . . 
Similar passages: Exodus 3:6,15–17; Exodus 13:1-6; Exod 33:1–3.
Q: Is the idea of a 'promised land' new as of Moses & the burning bush?
A: 
Exodus 7–12 The 10 Plagues, & the Question of the 10 Plagues and the Egypt's 'gods'.
Question: Do the 10 plagues confront particular gods of Egypt? 
Hint: Remember how ANE culture saw the operation of the 'natural' world: 
The subsequent Answer: 
Some passages in Exodus which reflect this issue: 
Exod 5:2 – Pharaoh speaking: "Who is Yahweh . . . .?"
Exodus 8:19; Exodus 12:12 "I will bring judgment upon . . . 
Exodus 18:9–11, from Jethro (Moses' father-in-law) 
9 Jethro was delighted to hear about all the good things the LORD had done for Israel in rescuing 
them from the hand of the Egyptians. 10 He said, "Praise be to the LORD, who rescued you from 
the hand of the Egyptians and of Pharaoh, and who rescued the people from the hand of the 
Egyptians. 11 Now I know that Yahweh is greater than all other gods, for he did this to those 
Pentateuch / Dr. Lane 2 H/O #20 – Exodus Overview #1, Chs. 1–24
who had treated Israel arrogantly." 12 Then Jethro, Moses' father-in-law, brought a burnt offering 
and other sacrifices to God, and Aaron came with all the elders of Israel to eat bread with Moses' 
father-in-law in the presence of God.
Exodus 12-14 The exodus from Egypt and the crossing of the Red Sea ("sea of reeds") takes place. 
Exodus 19 - 24 Israel Enters the 'Sinai Covenant' with God. 
(See H/O #21, Sinai ↔ Abrahamic covenants)
Exodus 19:3-8 "Now if ... then you will be Yahweh's treasured possession out of all nations of the earth."
Q: What is the difference between this and the Abrahamic promises? (Again, see H/O #21) 
A:
Q: Are any blessings guaranteed “up-front” here? 
A: 
Exodus 19:9-25 The dramatic manifestation of God ("theophany") at Mount Sinai. 
 Note 19:24-25 → Q: Where was Moses when the 10 Commandments were first spoken?
 A:
Exodus 20 The 10 Commandments
 The 10 Commandments reflect . . . 
 They are not formulated as “If this happens . . . then do this . . .”.
 But rather, as . . . .
 The values they affirm are accepted & affirmed in many cultures throughout the world. 
 Only one of them is not explicitly re-affirmed in the New Testament; which one? ________________ .
 Note 20:22-23 → Q: Did Israel hear the 10 Commandments as they were first spoken? 
 (See similarly Exod 32:8, Deut 5:2-5 + 22-27.)
 A: 
So what? 
Exodus 21-23 These chapters are sometimes called: . 
 • After the 10 Commandments, these chapters give us . . . 
 • They set forth a justice system . . . 
 • The most common penalty for theft is . . . 
Pentateuch / Dr. Lane 3 H/O #20 – Exodus Overview #1, Chs. 1–24
 • There are separate handouts for three specific issues addressed in these chapters: 
See H/O #22, "Exodus 21:22 & the Biblical View of the Sanctity of the Life,
 and of the Protection of the Unborn." 
See H/O #23, "An Eye for an Eye in the OT." 
See H/O #24, "How the OT Law Handles Theft vs. Accidental Injury." 
Exodus 24 . The Sinai covenant is ‘ratified’ with blood (see esp. v. 8). 
When a covenant is ratified, that means . . . 
Verses 3 & 7 – The Sinai covenant was . . .
 
Verses 4–8 – The Sinai covenant was . . . 
Verses 9–11 – The covenant meal ⇒ 
 Also, note the names . . . 
Verse 17 – Mt. Sinai looked like . . . 
What is one overall impression we get from this passage? 
* * * * * 

