
# Exodus Overview #2, Chs. 25–40

##### Recap:

Israel arrived at Mt. Sinai in Exodus 19, after traveling for about two months from the day they left Egypt. In Exodus 19, God invites them to commit to him in a covenant. If they do, they will be his “special people.” Israel responds, "All that Yahweh has said, we will do / we will obey" (Exod 19:8, then again in 24:3&7).

Then in Exodus 20 they receive the 10 Commandments. This is followed by three more chapters of basic laws for the covenant (Exod chs. 21–23). Then in Exodus 24, the covenant is affirmed and is ratified by an animal sacrifice ("this is the blood of the covenant which Yahweh has made with you . . .").

Which covenant is this?

##### Building the Tabernacle:

In the rest of the book of Exodus, chs. 25–40, the major concern is building the tabernacle. It is where the sacrifices will be offered, and where God's presence will dwell. Chapters 25–31 consist mostly of instructions for building it, and then in chs. 35–40 they actually build the tabernacle.

<pre>
Exodus 24:15–18
Moses went up onto Mt. Sinai for his 1st stay of 40 days.
Again, this is after the 10 Commandments were spoken by God to all Israel.
</pre>

----

- Exodus chs. 25–30 Instructions for building the tabernacle & the ark of the covenant.

  Which covenant?

- Exodus 31:12-18 The Sabbath is the sign of the __ covenant. [See also Exod 16:26.]

  - NB: This covenant, the Sinai covenant, is between . . .

    cf. Ezek 20:12, "… I gave them my Sabbaths as a sign between me and them . . .".

- Exodus 32 The Golden Calf. :(

- Exodus 34:1 → 28 Moses' 2nd 40-day stay on Mt. Sinai.

- Exodus 33:18 – 34:7 (esp.!! 34:6) "Yahweh, Yahweh, the compassionate and gracious God . . .".

  This theme is repeated in the OT: Num 14:18-19; 2 Kings 13:23; 2 Chron 30:9, Neh 9:17; Ps 86:15, Ps 103:1-8, Ps 111:4, Ps 145:8; Joel 2:13; Jonah 4:2. See also: Ps 51, Micah 7.

- A Serious Interpretive Question:

  Note: Exod 34:7b (+ Exod 20:5-6; Num 14:18; & Deut 5:9)

  - Q: Does Yahweh punish children for the sins of their fathers/parents?

    Some recent English translations seem to read that way: "He punishes the children for the sin of the fathers . . .". Is that true? See(!) H/O #26, "Does God Punish Children for the Sins of their Fathers?"

- Exodus 34:10 "I will do wonders . . .".

- Exodus chs. 35–40 The building of the tabernacle & the ark of the covenant.

- Exodus 40:33-38 The “guest of honor” arrives.

<hr class='logo' />

