
# Leviticus

#### Leviticus in General:

- Leviticus takes place while Israel is at . . .
- Israel stays at Mt Sinai . . .
- The book consists mostly of . . .

This is where the book gets its name: ≈ "Levite stuff".

- Q: Are these instructions "God's general will for all nations / all believers for all times"?

  A: Or, → are they for . . .

A principle strongly implied in Leviticus: As regards the concept of holiness . . .

----

- Chs. 1:1-6:7 The "first round" of instructions for the five sacrifices = the general instructions.

  For the five sacrifices listed in one verse: see Lev 7:37.

  <pre>The "ordination offering", also mentioned in 7:37, was a one-time offering, for Aaron & his sons; see 8:28.</pre>

- Chs. 6:8 - 7 The "second round" of instructions = the specific instructions for the priests.

  - Q: Are there any secrets rituals spelled out here?

- Leviticus 8 The Consecration of Aaron & his Sons to serve at the Tabernacle. // Don't miss 8:35.

- **Leviticus 9:23-24** - The First Sacrifices Offered at the Tabernacle.

  - Fire comes out from the cloud and consumes . . .

  - As for Nadab & Abihu (ch. 10) . . .

    - See(!) Lev 8:35 . . .
    - See also: Exod 30:7–9, esp. v. 9; + 30:34–38, esp. v. 37.

- Leviticus chs. 11-15 Clean vs. unclean ("The Holiness Code")

  - NB: "Unclean" ≠ That's why some translations render it:

    - Q: So what is the point of < cleanness ← vs. → uncleanness >?

      A: There are four dynamics involved:

      - Clean vs. unclean illustrates & teaches them the principle of . . .
      - It will make them distinct . . .
      - There do seem to be . . .
      - Leviticus 15:31 – Cleanness & the Tabernacle: It is to show particular regard for / respect for . . .

- Leviticus 18 Sexual Relationships that Are Prohibited

  See the separate handout, H/O #28, Re: the question of the OT's view of homosexual conduct.

- **Leviticus 19** Conduct that will make them holy, both commands and prohibitions.

  - NB! The laws in ch. 19 are not matters of . . .

    Rather, they are laws concerning . . .

  - 19:2 Note the general call: "Be holy, because I, Yahweh your God, am holy."

  - 19:9–18 In these verses, note especially –

    - vv. 9 & 10
    - v. 16b
    - v. 18 (!)

  - 19:19 ≈ Do not mix things . . .

  - 19:26–31 The laws in these verses mainly reject . . . .

- Leviticus 20 Punishments for Serious Moral Sins. (contrast this to chs. 11–15)

  For violations of rules relating to ceremonial 'cleanness' (Lev 11–15, see esp. chs. 12 & 14), the consequence was . . .

  But for serious moral violations . . .

- Leviticus 23 The "Appointed Feasts/Festivals": The Sabbath, + the Seven Annual Festivals.

- Leviticus 24:17-22 "Eye for an eye" [We addressed this in H/O #23, "An Eye for an Eye in the OT".]

  By way of review:

  - It occurs a total of __ in the OT. (Here in Lev 24, plus: Exod 21:22-25, & Deut 19:16-21.)

  - It is not . . .

    - Again, consider Prov 24:29 – "Do not say, 'I'll pay that man back . . .'.",
    - And esp., see Lev 19:18, above.

  - Rather, “an eye for an eye” is for . . .

- **Leviticus 26:12** (in specific). - The "Tri-Partite Promise" ( ≠ the three promises to Abraham )

  We see elements of this three-part promise beforehand, but this is the 1st time it is stated in full.

- Leviticus 26 (in general) The __ & __ of the __ covenant.

  Note esp. 26:40-45  The covenant which Yahweh remembers is . . .

  And what do they need to do so that Yahweh remembers that covenant?

<hr class='logo' />

