H/O #30 – Deuteronomy
Deuteronomy – Prof’s suggested nickname: 
In general, Deuteronomy: 
 • Is not a "2nd Law", but is . . . 
 • It reaffirms both . . . 
 • It divides into 3 Speeches: Chs. 1-4 Historical prologue = here's how we got here. 
Chs. 5-28 The main speech, which repeats many of the laws, and 
concludes with a list of covenantal blessings & curses.
Chs. 29-30 A concluding general appeal ( = the 3rd speech) 
Plus: Chs. 31-34 - Final concluding narratives & songs. 
 • Its structure also resembles the known the structure of . . . 
 Is this altogether surprising? 
 • Deut. seems to anticipate . . . 
[Deut 2:14 Moses reminds them that the entire generation of fighting men from the 1st census has died off.] 
[Deut 4:6-8 The other nations will remark: "What other nation is so wise . . . , etc." (3x).]
Deut 5 – The 10 Commandments, repeated / restated.
Deut. 6:1-9 The "Shema" and the Great Commandment
v. 4 The "Shema"; traditionally rendered: "Hear (!), O Israel, the LORD our God, the LORD is one." 
But what is the specific point that this verse is affirming? 
v. 5 The Great Commandment 
Similar in spirit to this, also note: 
Deut. 10:14-22, esp. v. 16 – Which calls on the Israelites to circumcise their hearts. 
Deut. 30:1-10, esp. v.6 – It speaks of a time when Yahweh will circumcise their hearts. 
Deut 7:1-15 . Some Distinctive Features of the Sinai Covenant.
 [Similar passages: 8:1,18; 11:8-21; 13:17-18; 30:11-20] 
7:1-5 Drive out the Canaanites. (As we saw above in Exod 23:20-33.)
7:6 Yahweh chose them out of all peoples to be his treasured possession (Exod 19:5).
7:7-14 If they honor Yahweh alone as God, and to obey the law, then Yahweh will bring to them 
these covenantal blessings . . . 
(!) 7:14 If(!) they follow Yahweh's law, they will be blessed →
[Deut 8:3 ". . . to teach you that man does not live by bread alone . . .". ]
[Deut 8:4 Did you happen to notice that . . . "your clothes did not wear out, and your feet did not swell up?" ]
Pentateuch / Dr. Lane 2 H/O #30 – Deuteronomy
Deut. 13 No worshipping false/foreign gods; Israelites who do so are to be put to death. 
Q: What covenant does this reflect? A: 
Deut 18:9-13 
Deut 18:14-22, esp. vv. 15, 18-19 A "Prophet like Moses" will come; see (!) Deut 34:10 below.
 [cf. Jer 18:7-8.] [In the NT, see John 1:21-25, 6:14 & 7:40]
[Deut 20:10–15 How Israel is to deal with cities / nations "that are at a distance' = that are not Canaanites. ]
Deut 21:18–21 How to deal with a stubborn & rebellious son . . . 
Deut 22:13–21 The case of a new wife whose virginity is question by her husband. 
22:13–19 – If his claims are slanderous . . .
22:20–21 – If the charge is true . . . 
Deut 24:1–4 Certificate of Divorce – "If a man marries a woman who becomes displeasing to him . . .".
Deut 26:19 They are his treasured possession, and He will set them high above all the nations, if . . .
Deut. 28 The Blessings and the Curses of the Sinai Covenant 
 ( Q: What chapter that came earlier does this remind us of? __________________ )
 Yet note esp. v. 9 → Yahweh swears(!) to bless them → if (!) they honor & obey him. 
Deut 29:9-28 The Renewal of the Sinai Covenant, + the "oath-which-invokes-a-curse" of the Sinai covt. 
Note the outcome for an Israelite who scorns God and goes his own way . . . 
Deut 30:1-10 "The Lord will circumcise your hearts . . ." 
But read(!) the context; this is portrayed as occurring after . . . 
Deut 30:15-20 This is the "Final Appeal" of the entire Pentateuch. Its central thoughts are: 
• Not simply: 
• But rather, 
• Esp.: 
• And if they do, then: 
Deut 34:4 "This is the land I swore to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob . . .". Moses gets to see it, but . . . 
Deut 34:10 → Is commonly translated: "No prophet has ever arisen like Moses . . .". 
 But it can also be understood as: 
If so, what does it suggest? 
Q: Also, what does the natural reading of this verse suggest concerning when it was written? 
* * * * *
